Section 1
POCSO Act - Protection of Children from Sexual Offences
The Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 (POCSO) protects children below 18 years from sexual abuse, sexual harassment, and pornography. It provides child-friendly procedures for reporting, recording of evidence, and speedy trial.

Section 3
POCSO - Penetrative Sexual Assault
Whoever commits penetrative sexual assault on a child shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten years but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine. Aggravated penetrative sexual assault: minimum 20 years, may extend to life imprisonment or death.

Section 7
POCSO - Sexual Assault
Whoever, with sexual intent, touches the vagina, penis, anus or breast of the child or makes the child touch the vagina, penis, anus or breast of such person or any other person, except where such touching is carried out for a medical purpose, commits sexual assault. Punishment: imprisonment not less than 3 years which may extend to 5 years.

Section 11
POCSO - Sexual Harassment
Whoever, with sexual intent, makes a child exhibit his body or any part of his body so as it is seen by such person, follows a child online, repeatedly or constantly watches or contacts a child, threatens to use real or fabricated depiction through electronic or any other media, commits sexual harassment. Punishment: imprisonment not less than 3 years.

Section 13
POCSO - Use of Child for Pornographic Purposes
Whoever uses a child in any form of media for sexual gratification commits the offence of using a child for pornographic purposes. Punishment: rigorous imprisonment of up to five years and fine on first conviction, and not less than seven years on subsequent conviction.

Section 14
POCSO - Punishment for Using Child for Pornographic Purposes
Whoever uses a child for pornographic purposes shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years and shall also be liable to fine, and in the event of subsequent conviction with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven years.

Section 19
POCSO - Reporting of Offences
Any person who has apprehension that an offence under this Act is likely to be committed or has knowledge that such an offence has been committed shall provide information to the Special Juvenile Police Unit or to the local police. Failure to report is an offence.

Section 21
POCSO - Punishment for Failure to Report or Record a Case
Any person, who fails to report the commission of an offence, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description which may extend to six months or with fine or with both.

Section 2
Domestic Violence Act - Protection of Women from Domestic Violence
The Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 provides protection to women from acts of domestic violence and provides for right to reside in shared household. Domestic violence includes physical, sexual, verbal, emotional and economic abuse.

Section 12
Domestic Violence Act - Application to Magistrate
An aggrieved person or any person on behalf of an aggrieved person may present an application to the Magistrate seeking relief. The Magistrate shall fix the first date of hearing which shall not be beyond 3 days from the date of receipt of the application.

Section 17
Domestic Violence Act - Right to Reside in Shared Household
Every woman in a domestic relationship shall have the right to reside in the shared household, whether or not she has any right, title or beneficial interest in the same. An aggrieved woman shall not be evicted or excluded from the shared household or any part of it by the respondent.

Section 18
Domestic Violence Act - Protection Orders
The Magistrate may pass a protection order restraining the respondent from committing any act of domestic violence, aiding or abetting any act of domestic violence, entering any place of employment of the aggrieved person, communicating with the aggrieved person, alienating any assets.

Section 20
Domestic Violence Act - Monetary Relief
The Magistrate may direct the respondent to pay monetary relief to meet the expenses incurred and losses suffered by the aggrieved person and any child due to the domestic violence. Relief may include loss of earnings, medical expenses, loss caused to property, maintenance.

Section 3
Dowry Prohibition Act - Penalty for Giving or Taking Dowry
If any person gives or takes or abets the giving or taking of dowry, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years, and with fine which shall not be less than fifteen thousand rupees or the amount of the value of such dowry, whichever is more.

Section 6
Dowry Prohibition Act - Dowry to Be for Benefit of Wife
Where any dowry is received by any person other than the woman in connection with whose marriage it is given, that person shall transfer it to the woman within three months after the date of marriage or after the date of receipt, whichever is later.

Section 4
NCW - National Commission for Women
The National Commission for Women (NCW) is a statutory body established under NCW Act, 1990. NCW accepts complaints related to deprivation of women's rights, non-implementation of laws protecting women, gender-based violence. NCW helpline: 7217735372. Website: ncwapps.nic.in.

Section 5
Acid Attack Laws - BNS Section 124
Acid attack is punishable with rigorous imprisonment not less than ten years which may extend to life imprisonment and fine of not less than ten lakh rupees to be given to victim for medical expenses. Hospital must treat acid attack victims free of cost. No acid to be sold to person below 18 years.

Section 6
Maternity Benefit Act - Maternity Leave Rights
Every woman employed directly or through contractor is entitled to maternity benefit at rate of average daily wage for period of actual absence from work. Maternity leave: 26 weeks for first two children, 12 weeks for third child and beyond.

Section 7
Sexual Harassment at Workplace - POSH Act
The Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013 mandates that all organizations with 10 or more employees constitute an Internal Complaints Committee (ICC). Every district must have Local Complaints Committee (LCC). Complaints must be resolved within 60 days.

Section 8
Honour Killing - BNS Provisions
Honour killings where a person is killed for marrying against family wishes or for inter-caste/inter-religion marriage is murder under BNS Section 103 punishable with death penalty or life imprisonment. Courts have held that killing in the name of honour has no legal sanction whatsoever.

Section 9
Female Genital Mutilation
Female genital mutilation (FGM) or Khatna is illegal and constitutes grievous hurt under BNS Section 117, child abuse under POCSO. The Supreme Court of India has held that no religious custom can override a woman's bodily integrity and right to life.

Section 10
Child Marriage - Prohibition
The Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006 declares child marriages voidable at the option of the contracting party who was a child at the time of marriage. Child marriage means marriage where either party is below 18 (girl) or 21 (boy). Punishment: imprisonment up to 2 years or fine up to 1 lakh rupees.

Section 11
Trafficking - Anti Human Trafficking
Human trafficking is punishable under BNS Section 84. The Anti-Trafficking in Persons (Prevention, Care and Rehabilitation) Act provides framework for rescue, recovery and rehabilitation. National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) helpline: 14433. Anti-trafficking helpline: 1800-11-6666.

Section 12
Child Labour Laws
The Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Amendment Act, 2016 prohibits employment of children below 14 years in any occupation. Children between 14-18 years cannot be employed in hazardous occupations. Punishment: imprisonment of 6 months to 2 years or fine.

Section 13
Women Helplines and Resources
National Women Helpline: 181 (all states, 24x7). Police helpline: 100. Domestic violence helpline: 181. CHILDLINE: 1098 (for children in distress). NCW: ncwapps.nic.in. One Stop Centre scheme (Sakhi) provides integrated services to women affected by violence including medical, police, legal, psychological support.

Section 14
Marital Rape and Sexual Violence within Marriage
While marital rape is not currently a standalone criminal offence in India (ongoing litigation), a wife can file complaint under Domestic Violence Act for sexual violence, IPC/BNS for assault. Supreme Court proceedings ongoing on criminalization of marital rape.

Section 15
Abortion Rights - Medical Termination of Pregnancy
Medical Termination of Pregnancy (MTP) Amendment Act, 2021 extends upper gestational limit from 20 to 24 weeks for special categories of women including survivors of rape, sexual assault, incest, minors, and women with fetal abnormality. Requires registered medical practitioners.

Section 16
Cybercrime Against Women
Online harassment of women including morphed images, non-consensual pornography, cyberstalking, trolling, rape threats is covered under IT Act Section 66E, 67, 67A and BNS Section 75 (sexual harassment), Section 77 (stalking). Report at cybercrime.gov.in. NCW online complaint portal is also available.
